Document creating playbooks with Project Ansible Module Collections (#3844)
theforeman/foreman-documentation: guides/common/modules/proc_creating-a-playbook-with-modules-from-project-ansible-collections.adoc

[id="creating-a-playbook-with-modules-from-{project-context}-ansible-collections"]
= Creating a playbook with modules from {Project} Ansible Collections

Ansible modules from the {Project} Ansible Collections must be able to communicate with the {Project} API over HTTPS.
In your playbooks, include parameters specifying how to authenticate to enable the connection to API.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Do not store sensitive credentials, such as username and password, directly in your playbooks or environment variables.
The following examples use Ansible vault to manage sensitive data.
====

.Prerequisites
* A user account in {Project} exists with permissions to perform the action defined in your playbook.
* You have access to one of the following types of authentication credentials for that user:
** Username and password

> ** Kerberos ticket, if your {ProjectServer} is configured to use {FreeIPA} as an external authentication source

Reviewer: AD should work too

Author: We discussed this and agreed that even though AD should work too, we'll keep only a reference to FreeIPA here, among other things because we don't document Kerberos for Hammer authentication in the AD scenario either.

> ** {Project} Personal Access Token

Reviewer: the token still needs a username

Author: Added.

.Procedure

> . Store your sensitive variables in an encrypted file:

Author: This procedure uses an established template from RHEL system roles docs: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_enterprise_linux/9/html-single/automating_system_administration_by_using_rhel_system_roles/index#creating-a-luks2-encrypted-volume-using-the-storage-role_managing-local-storage-using-rhel-system-roles  For consistency with RHEL, it would be nice if we could stick to it. However, if there are strong objections to the wording, I suppose we don't necessarily have to.

.. Create an Ansible vault.
For example, to create a vault named _My_Vault.yml_:
+
[subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
$ ansible-vault create _My_Vault.yml_
----
.. After the `ansible-vault create` command opens an editor, provide the required parameters in the _key_: _value_ format.
+
If you want to authenticate with {Project} user credentials:
+
[source,ini,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
_My_Server_URL_: _https://{foreman-example-com}_
_My_Username_: _My_Admin_User_Account_
_My_Password_: _My_Admin_Password_
----
+
If you want to authenticate with a Kerberos ticket or a Personal Access Token:
+
[source,ini,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
_My_Server_URL_: _https://{foreman-example-com}_

> ----

Author: If the PAT scenario needs a username too, should I create a new substep here for PAT? One that would save both URL and username into the vault?

Author: Added.

.. Save the changes, and close the editor.
Ansible encrypts the data in the vault.
. Create a playbook file that references the vault file.
+
[NOTE]
====
To simplify vault file management, the following YAML snippets use module default groups by defining the `module_defaults` parameter.

> With module default groups, any {ansible-namespace} module within the playbook automatically references the vault file, which eliminates the need to pass vault parameters to each module separately.

Author: I know what you mean but this is proving surprisingly difficult to explain. I gave it another shot, hopefully it's clearer now.

====
+
If you are authenticating with {Project} user credentials:
+
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
- name: _My Playbook_
  hosts: _localhost_
  vars_files:
    - _My_Vault.yml_
  module_defaults:

>     group/redhat.satellite.satellite:

Reviewer: this needs attributes ;)

Author: I added a new attribute (hoping that `theforeman.foreman.foreman` is the right thing to be displayed upstream).

Reviewer: it is the right thing, yes!

      username: "{{ username }}"
      password: "{{ password }}"

>       server_url: "{{ server_url }}"

Author: Stupid, stupid me :) Fixed.

>   tasks:

Reviewer: I could have sworn `tasks: (nothing)` is not a valid playbook, but `ansible-playbook` says it is, TIL!

Author: Should I add some kind of placeholder here? I'll try adding at least `- name:`, hopefully it will at least look a bit less weird.

Reviewer: fun fact: if you just add `- name:` the sytnax check fails:
```
ERROR! no module/action detected in task.

The error appears to be in '/tmp/tmp.9TR5hUkYtx/lol.yml': line 4, column 7, but may
be elsewhere in the file depending on the exact syntax problem.

The offending line appears to be:

  tasks:
    - name: test
      ^ here
```

so if you want to add something, it has to be a "reasonable" example (which would just copy the domain example later)

Author: Ok, I'm dropping it again. I tried the domain example in one of the earlier drafts but didn't like the repetition (as you're pointing out yourself). I'll keep this thread open to see if I can come up with something. If not, this will probably also do as is.

Author: I decided to try adding a new step that explicitly says that users should add their modules under `tasks:`. That required making the structure of the procedure a bit more complex by introducing a new set of substeps, but hopefully it's not overly complex now. Time (and peer review) will tell.

----
+
If you are authenticating with a Kerberos ticket or a Personal Access Token:
+
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
- name: _My Playbook_
  hosts: _localhost_
  vars_files:
    - _My_Vault.yml_
  module_defaults:
    group/redhat.satellite.satellite:

>       server_url: "{{ server_url }}"

Reviewer: same, `_My_Server_URL_`

Author: Done

[id="creating-a-playbook-with-modules-from-{project-context}-ansible-collections"]
= Creating a playbook with modules from {Project} Ansible Collections

Ansible modules from the {Project} Ansible Collections must be able to communicate with the {Project} API over HTTPS.
In your playbooks, include parameters specifying how to authenticate to enable the connection to API.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Do not store sensitive credentials, such as username and password, directly in your playbooks or environment variables.
The following examples use Ansible vault to manage sensitive data.
====

.Prerequisites
* A user account in {Project} exists with permissions to perform the action defined in your playbook.
* You have access to one of the following types of authentication credentials for that user:

> ** Username and password
> ** Kerberos ticket, if your {ProjectServer} is configured to use {FreeIPA} as an external authentication source
> ** Username and {Project} Personal Access Token

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Username and password
** Username and {PAT}
** Kerberos ticket, if your {ProjectServer} is configured to use {FreeIPA} as an external authentication source
```

* the sorting felt more natural this way -- no idea why
* there is an attribute for PAT (why?) and the {Project} in front seems duplicating -- you're not saying {Project} password either.

* A system that can reach the {Project} API.

> This is the system that you will execute your playbook against.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Run your playbook against this system.
```

Author: This is one suggestion that I've decided to skip, Brian. This might be just me nitpicking but I believe that here, when we're just explaining what the user will do (prerequisites), it's better to stay on a theoretical level rather than use imperative voice. It might be more confusing if users feel like they're already being told to do something now when in reality, it's what they'll do later in the procedure.

It can be {ProjectServer} itself.
The following examples use `localhost`.

.Procedure
. Store your sensitive variables in an encrypted file:
.. Create an Ansible vault.
For example, to create a vault named _My_Vault.yml_:
+
[subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
$ ansible-vault create _My_Vault.yml_
----
.. After the `ansible-vault create` command opens an editor, provide the required parameters in the _key_: _value_ format.
+

> If you want to authenticate with {Project} user credentials:
> +
> [source,ini,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
> ----
> _My_Server_URL_: _https://{foreman-example-com}_
> _My_Username_: _My_Admin_User_Account_
> _My_Password_: _My_Admin_Password_
> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to authenticate with {Project} user credentials (with password or {PAT}):
+
[source,ini,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
_My_Server_URL_: _https://{foreman-example-com}_
_My_Username_: _My_Admin_User_Account_
_My_Password_: _My_Admin_Password_or_PAT_
----
```

+

> If you want to authenticate with a Kerberos ticket or a Personal Access Token:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to authenticate with a Kerberos ticket:
```

+
[source,ini,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
_My_Server_URL_: _https://{foreman-example-com}_
----

> .. Save the changes, and close the editor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Save your changes and close the editor.
```

Ansible encrypts the data in the vault.
. Create a playbook file that references the vault file:
+
[NOTE]
====

> The following YAML snippets include the `module_defaults` keyword to define vault parameters for all modules from the {ansible-module-defaults-group} group that are used in the playbook.
> Module defaults groups simplify parameter management by enabling you define common parameters to groups of modules rather than having to pass the parameters to each module individually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following YAML snippets include the `module_defaults` keyword to pass vault variables as parameters for all modules from the {ansible-module-defaults-group} group that are used in the playbook.
Module defaults groups simplify parameter management by enabling you define common parameters to groups of modules rather than having to pass the parameters to each module individually.
```

Can/should we link https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_module_defaults.html#module-defaults-groups? It's not very extensive, but gives a bit more background at least?

+
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
- name: _My Playbook_
  hosts: _localhost_
  vars_files:
    - _My_Vault.yml_
  module_defaults:
    group/{ansible-module-defaults-group}:
      username: "{{ _My_Username_ }}"
      password: "{{ _My_Password_ }}"
      server_url: "{{ _My_Server_URL_ }}"
  tasks:
----
+
If you are authenticating with a Kerberos ticket, map the `server_url` parameter to the contents of _My_Vault.yml_ and use `use_gssapi: true` to enable Kerberos authentication:
+
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
- name: _My Playbook_
  hosts: _localhost_
  vars_files:
    - _My_Vault.yml_
  module_defaults:
    group/{ansible-module-defaults-group}:
      server_url: "{{ _My_Server_URL_ }}"
      use_gssapi: true
  tasks:
----
+
If you are authenticating with a {Project} Personal Access Token, map the `username` parameter to the contents of _My_Vault.yml_:
+
[source,yaml,subs="+quotes,attributes"]
----
- name: _My Playbook_
  hosts: _localhost_
  vars_files:
    - _My_Vault.yml_
  module_defaults:
    group/{ansible-module-defaults-group}:

>       password: "{{ _My_Password_ }}"

Reviewer: this is missing username and url

Author: Addressed

  tasks:
----
.. In the `tasks:` section, define the tasks that you want your playbook to perform.
For examples, see xref:example-playbooks-based-on-modules-from-{project-context}-ansible-collections[].
. Validate the playbook syntax:
+
[subs="+quotes"]
----

> $ ansible-playbook --syntax-check --ask-vault-pass ~/_My_Playbook.yml_

Reviewer: I'd drop the `~/` here (and below), and assume the user placed it somewhere sensible (after all, you didn't tell them to create exactly `~/my_playbook.yml`)

Author: Updated.

----
+

> Note that this command only validates the syntax and does not protect against a wrong but valid configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that this command only validates the syntax.
It does not protect against a valid but incorrect configuration.
```

Reviewer 2: Could also use the conjunction and say "Note that this command only validates the syntax and does not protect against a valid but incorrect configuration." Doesn't have to be two sentences as per my suggestion.
